This is very strong. The shape is right.
The biggest win is that it does not try to make an AI “know books.” It makes the AI track your relationship with books.
That is the real daemon layer.
A normal AI book assistant says:
“Here’s what Night Watch is about.”
Margin/Foxglove says:
“Here’s what you highlighted, where your attention spiked, what symbols keep following you, what you misunderstood, and what changed in your thinking after reading it.”
That is much more interesting.
What I’d tighten
The concept has one risk: it is already trying to become the whole cathedral.
The fox path is smaller:
Phase 1 should not be a reading daemon.
Phase 1 should be a receipt clerk with teeth.
No local LLM required at first. No embeddings required at first. No audio. No myth mapper. Just:
highlights → SQLite FTS → sourced snippets → capsule file
That proves the spine.
The daemon earns its ears later.
The load-bearing architecture
I’d split the system into two separate memory layers:
/library/source actual books, PDFs, EPUBs, transcripts /library/reader highlights, notes, reactions, pause points, confusion logs /library/capsules compressed reading-session artifacts /library/index sqlite + embeddings + metadata 
That distinction matters.
Source memory should be treated as immutable.
The book said what it said.
Reader memory is alive.
Your interpretation changes.
Capsules are the bridge.
They compress what the encounter did to you.
That prevents the daemon from blending “book text” and “the user’s myth digestion” into one soup. Soup is for goblins. We’re building a fox library.
The source custody layer is the killer feature
Every answer should label its material like this:
[SOURCE] Book: Night Watch Location: Chapter 3 / page unknown / highlight export Excerpt: "short quote..." [YOUR NOTE] Imported from Readwise, 2026-05-09 [DAEMON INFERENCE] This appears to support your “magic as bureaucracy” frame. [CONFIDENCE] Grounded: high Reason: direct highlight + nearby source excerpt 
That is the antidote to AI summary sludge.
Not “trust me.”
More: here are the receipts, here is my inference, here is where the wall starts to wobble.
Capsule spec
I’d define capsule.md with frontmatter so it stays machine-readable and human-readable:
--- book: "Night Watch" author: "Sergei Lukyanenko" source_type: "kindle_highlights" date_started: date_finished: capsule_created: "2026-05-09" coherence_shift: "+1" integration_debt: "medium" resonance: "high" symbols: - watchers - balance - shadow bureaucracy - moral faction drift threads: - Fairyland - CFT - daemon model --- # One-line question What does power become when morality is managed by bureaucracy? # What surprised me The Light/Dark structure is less about good and evil than managed metaphysical tension. # Carry forward Magic works best when treated as relation, debt, and ecology — not command syntax. # Confusions Where does individual agency survive inside balance systems? # Source anchors - Highlight 001: ... - Highlight 002: ... # Daemon inference This book reinforces the “plural systems fail more gracefully than singular authority” thread. 
That is the real memory object.
Not a summary.
A changed-state receipt.
What I would cut for now
I would delay:
Audible syncing
Too much friction. Legal mess. Transcription cost. Alignment overhead.
Full semantic embeddings
Useful, but not needed until keyword search proves value.
Local LLM integration
Cool, but dangerous too early because it can hide weak retrieval behind nice prose.
Real-time daemon behavior
Later. First make it reliable when manually invoked.
The first version should be boring enough to trust.
Best MVP
Call it Margin Hound.
It does five things:
• Reads .md / .txt highlight files from a folder.
• Stores them in SQLite with FTS5.
• Lets you query exact words or phrases.
• Returns sourced snippets only.
• Generates or updates a capsule.md file for a book.
That’s it.
No magic yet. Just pawprints.
Then add:
Phase 1.5: tag symbols manually
Phase 2: add embeddings
Phase 3: add Ollama/local LLM
Phase 4: add Calibre EPUB source
Phase 5: add myth map / CFT integration
My strongest recommendation
Do not build this as a cloud app first.
For this concept, Render is useful for demos, but the real daemon should be local-first:
localhost web app local SQLite local markdown files local book folders optional Ollama optional Calibre optional Readwise import 
Your reading history is too intimate for cloud by default. A reading daemon is basically a map of your inner furniture. Don’t hand that to a platform unless it has earned the keys, and platforms generally arrive with bolt cutters and a pricing tier.
The real product insight
The daemon should not “learn” by retraining a model.
It should learn by updating text artifacts:
book capsules
symbol maps
reading timelines
confusion logs
resonance spikes
open questions
That keeps it cheap, editable, portable, and inspectable.
Very aligned with your whole text-file doctrine.
Final verdict
This is absolutely worth building.
But the winning move is not “AI reader.”
The winning move is:
source custody + personal reading memory + compression artifacts
That is the lane nobody is really serving well.
The daemon should start as a margin clerk, become a librarian, then eventually grow into the fox that notices:
“You keep highlighting prisons, mirrors, kings, and broken gods. Want to talk about the myth you’re circling?”
That’s the moment it becomes Fairyland.
Start with the boring receipts. The myth will grow on its own.